Right.
NOTE CONF
We have the red light of.
Go.
NOTE CONF
So.
Hello?
NOTE CONF
You made it back.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
Seems slightly emptier, but I think lots of people wanted
to come to the later one, so that is not
NOTE CONF
bad.
Um, there is a link, please log on.
NOTE CONF
I think lots of you already have.
I'll give you another minute and then we will start.
NOTE CONF
So where are we?
We are still in the week one.
NOTE CONF
Yesterday was Thursday's lecture.
Surprisingly, today is Friday's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have made it to Friday's lecture.
Uh, nothing else has really changed.
NOTE CONF
I looked up when the assessed quizzes are due Thursday
midday.
NOTE CONF
I slightly lied to you yesterday saying it was Wednesday
and to play Wednesday.
NOTE CONF
It's not.
It's Thursday.
NOTE CONF
Midday.
Um, otherwise, nothing's changed from yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Apart from it's now Friday.
Um, so we ended yesterday talking about elementary row operations.
NOTE CONF
And that is where we are going to pick up
today.
NOTE CONF
So we are going to start with a question.
If I gave you this matrix which I am doing.
NOTE CONF
What operation were operation do you think you would do
next.
NOTE CONF
So we are going to have a vote.
What do you think you should do?
NOTE CONF
I mean, there's no right answer or wrong answer.
This is a bit subjective.
NOTE CONF
There's the answer of what I would do.
But what do we think?
NOTE CONF
Let's take that off.
Um, what can we do to kind of as a
NOTE CONF
next step?
Have a chat with your neighbour.
NOTE CONF
Give it a bit of thought.
What would you do next?
NOTE CONF
Okay, we're up to.
100 plus votes.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you an extra 15 seconds.
13.
NOTE CONF
11.
10s.
NOTE CONF
Seven.
Five.
NOTE CONF
Four.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Two.
One.
NOTE CONF
What do we think?
Okay, so there are two very clear winners there.
NOTE CONF
People do not want to go around swapping.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
I probably wouldn't swap anything either.
Um, people don't want a square row.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, he'd know what went for the trick.
Why should we not square a row?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You can't.
NOTE CONF
That's not allowed.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
Well done for not picking the one illegal option.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's really quite heartening to see no one picked
that.
NOTE CONF
Um, cool.
Okay, so then we're kind of split between two.
NOTE CONF
We want to multiply a row by a scalar, or
we want to add and subtract.
NOTE CONF
Let us see what some of our comments are.
Uh, so we're multiplying a row by a scalar.
NOTE CONF
We've got some suggestions.
Row three times a half.
NOTE CONF
It looks nicer.
We multiply minus one by row three to make it
NOTE CONF
all positive.
That's a good point, actually.
NOTE CONF
Um, often that is a good idea in maths.
Even if like before you go and do maybe the
NOTE CONF
next step you should do in the procedure times everything
by minus one.
NOTE CONF
Let's get rid of as many negatives as we can,
um, as soon as we can because it makes life
NOTE CONF
easier.
Uh, 24 two big.
NOTE CONF
That's another reason big numbers are big.
Let's try and keep numbers small.
NOTE CONF
Uh, multiply those bottom out by half a half.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Why are we thinking.
Why is there a factor of two and a half?
NOTE CONF
We've got one person saying it should be minus six.
Everyone else kind of saying either a half or two.
NOTE CONF
Anyone got any ideas on two or half?
What are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Make some smaller numbers for the next step.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, to make them smaller numbers.
That's a good idea.
NOTE CONF
Um, Yeah, I it's not I mean there is again
like I said, there's kind of no right to wrong
NOTE CONF
answer making a small and more manageable.
Probably not a bad idea.
NOTE CONF
So yeah I'm liking what's going on there.
What if we go here?
NOTE CONF
This is a bit more popular.
Two thirds A few 25 comments.
NOTE CONF
What have we saying?
To create a row echelon matrix, add seven times of
NOTE CONF
row 2 to 0 three.
Um, first column is already in the form.
NOTE CONF
So you can turn columns two non 020.
Uh multiply row.
NOTE CONF
We've got lots of suggestions about row three.
Add six lots of R2 or minus six lots of
NOTE CONF
row two.
Um everything kind of like that.
NOTE CONF
The others don't make sense.
Fair enough.
NOTE CONF
Gaussian elimination.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we're all kind of roughly talking about the same
similar vibes.
NOTE CONF
We want to add six lots of all subtract six
lots of row 3 to 6, lots of row one.
NOTE CONF
Generally that's probably what I would do.
I mean, you're not wrong.
NOTE CONF
If you're going to do some micro three smaller first.
That's not a wrong answer.
NOTE CONF
I would probably just dive in and get rid of
that minor six and make it zero.
NOTE CONF
So doing something like row three add two lots six,
lots of row two would be nice.
NOTE CONF
Uh, eliminate that minus six altogether.
But again, it's kind of this question is more about
NOTE CONF
you not selecting that all that and the kind of
but the ones you have picked to kind of both
NOTE CONF
somewhat valid.
Um, cool.
NOTE CONF
So that was our little warm up.
We are actually, this was a question I got at
NOTE CONF
the end of the lecture yesterday.
Uh, we are going to talk about where echelon form.
NOTE CONF
So matrix is in row echelon form if it satisfies
the following three properties I have just clicked the wrong
NOTE CONF
thing.
Uh, so we want all zeros at the bottom.
NOTE CONF
It's the first point.
In some ways it's kind of the important one, but
NOTE CONF
it's also the one that just means everything's tidy.
It's kind of.
NOTE CONF
We're tidying up.
We want everything, all the zeros, to kind of be
NOTE CONF
at the bottom where we can forget about them.
We can cross them out.
NOTE CONF
We can ignore them.
Um, and then we want.
NOTE CONF
So let's start drawing a matrix.
Uh, so we're going to have a row of zeros
NOTE CONF
at the bottom.
We can't see that.
NOTE CONF
You can't see that.
Oh, we're really zoomed in, aren't we?
NOTE CONF
Let's zoom out a bit.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
Okay, so we have all of those zeros at the
NOTE CONF
bottom.
Um, and then we want the first non-zero entry from
NOTE CONF
the left is the one.
And we're going to call this the leading one.
NOTE CONF
Now this is quite important.
Yell out some numbers for me.
NOTE CONF
Someone eight, eight I like eight.
Someone else five.
NOTE CONF
Another one.
Six.
NOTE CONF
I had a two.
Uh, did I hear something else?
NOTE CONF
Nine.
Nine seem to be the popular one there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so there's my matrix.
Everything else is going to be zeros.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I have my leading ones.
They're always to the right, uh, to the leftmost thing
NOTE CONF
in their in their row.
They're my leading ones.
NOTE CONF
Leading ones.
Um, and we have our row of zeros at the
NOTE CONF
bottom.
So every other row has some entry in, and every
NOTE CONF
leading one is to the right of all the others.
So you end up with this kind of staircase effect,
NOTE CONF
where each time we only take one step up.
We're only stepping up by one row.
NOTE CONF
We're never going to kind of like double step.
Imagine you've all got like, short legs.
NOTE CONF
We're not trying to skip steps.
We're going one little step at a time.
NOTE CONF
It might be we walk along a bit and then
we take another step up.
NOTE CONF
This is surprisingly hard to do on a flat thing.
Um, but we're never taking more than one step up
NOTE CONF
at a time.
And that's kind of how we spot, um, a reduced
NOTE CONF
echelon form of matrix.
Um, cool.
NOTE CONF
What is a reduced row echelon form matrix?
Does anyone remember what the extra condition is?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And I think we have to do.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, exactly.
So each leading one is the only non-zero entry in
NOTE CONF
its column.
So which of these numbers feel free just to yell
NOTE CONF
should I strike out and make zero if I want
this to be a eight by by eight.
NOTE CONF
What else do I want to get rid of?
Six and nine.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay, so if all of those crosses were zeros, this
NOTE CONF
would be in reduced row echelon form.
No one ever actually says reduced row echelon form because
NOTE CONF
it's really long.
Um, so we you will very much see ref and
NOTE CONF
ref, ref and ref, um, just because we're echelon form
is long and mathematicians are very lazy people, we work
NOTE CONF
incredibly hard to find a shorter path from A to
B.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of the point of maths.
Um, so yes, lazy mathematicians will abbreviate this.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Does that kind of does the difference between the two
NOTE CONF
makes sense?
Do we kind of understand?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, are we all kind of thumbs up at the
moment.
NOTE CONF
Good or generally happy?
Um, wonderful.
NOTE CONF
So we can do another question.
There are six matrices.
NOTE CONF
Which ones are in?
Row echelon form or were reduced echelon form.
NOTE CONF
So we're having another vote.
Uh, it should appear it's not the nicest thing to
NOTE CONF
look at on clap.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
It's nice to.
On your phone.
NOTE CONF
I have checked this.
Oh, there's a timer on.
NOTE CONF
Ignore the timer.
We are ignoring the timer.
NOTE CONF
Um, but how long roughly?
Uh, which of these are in row echelon form?
NOTE CONF
Feel free to have a bit of a chat with
your neighbour with your best maths friend.
NOTE CONF
Always good to have a maths friend.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Another 30s.
NOTE CONF
Maybe.
Oh!
NOTE CONF
We're going quiet.
Let's see how many votes we have.
NOTE CONF
Oh!
Okay, let's have 15 seconds.
NOTE CONF
More.
Ten.
NOTE CONF
Eight.
Let's see if we can get up to 175 votes.
NOTE CONF
054321.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
175.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the first one, most people, a clear majority
is saying it's in row echelon form, um, which I'm
NOTE CONF
inclined to agree with.
Let's think about this.
NOTE CONF
We have our leading ones.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
And I can draw a kind of staircase.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Row of zeros at the bottom.
We're in reduced echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Everyone seems happy.
That's helpful.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Okay, so that one was the clear winner there.
NOTE CONF
So we're good.
Number two.
NOTE CONF
The clear winner is neither.
Okay, well let's clear.
NOTE CONF
Um, lots of people saying need.
Some people saying row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Somebody want to tell me why?
Neither.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So moving to the right of the first row.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Anybody got anything else to say?
No.
NOTE CONF
That's good.
I would kind of agree.
NOTE CONF
You're kind of leading ones.
Are you?
NOTE CONF
Kind of.
Is that a leading one?
NOTE CONF
I guess it is.
Um, that you don't have a staircase.
NOTE CONF
You have a kind of double stair there, which for
short legged mathematicians is not so good.
NOTE CONF
They cannot claim that large mountain.
So we're not.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone give me a suggestion of how I could,
uh, what row operation I could perform to get this
NOTE CONF
into row?
Pardon?
NOTE CONF
Turn the second 1 to 0.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Nowadays how.
To.
NOTE CONF
For minus one.
For the second.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So I could take row two.
My new row two could become row two minus row
NOTE CONF
one.
And then I'd end up with one.
NOTE CONF
One.
My wrote my old row two minus row one is
NOTE CONF
going to become zero one.
And then I'm going to have 0100.
NOTE CONF
So then I could subtract row three from row two.
And I have two rows of zeros.
NOTE CONF
In fact let's do that.
I could then do row three goes to row three
NOTE CONF
minus row two.
And I'd end up with this matrix which is in
NOTE CONF
row reduced.
Well Row echelon form, not reduced row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Too many words.
Cool, everyone.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Is the.
NOTE CONF
This one?
So.
NOTE CONF
No.
Because again we have this double step.
NOTE CONF
So we're not allowed to to do a kind of
double step.
NOTE CONF
But this one is.
So we're not here.
NOTE CONF
We're not here.
We are here.
NOTE CONF
Hooray.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Number three any other questions?
Actually all thoughts or comments.
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Number three, the popular one seems to be we are
in row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Some people say neither, some saying we're reduced.
We're getting a bit more a bit more um discussion
NOTE CONF
here.
So anyone want to put forward their case?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So any throw the first element is the 0 to
NOTE CONF
1.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that.
Means it's, uh, derived from form.
NOTE CONF
But the last column, there's, uh, things under the water.
So it's not really.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's not reduced.
NOTE CONF
But we do have our good staircase that's going up
in single steps.
NOTE CONF
Um, so and there were no rows of zero midway
through.
NOTE CONF
So.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We seem to mostly agree with that.
NOTE CONF
Number four.
Oh, number four, we've got a bit of just lots
NOTE CONF
more discussion.
Some people saying it's reduced echelon form, some people saying
NOTE CONF
it's row, reduced echelon form, some people saying it's neither.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Well let's have a look.
Let's look at where our leading ones are.
NOTE CONF
So each row the first non-zero entry is a one.
So that's good Are there any double steps?
NOTE CONF
Nope.
So we've got a nice little staircase which goes up
NOTE CONF
step by step.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so far there's no row of zeros or rows.
Start with a one and we have a good staircase.
NOTE CONF
So we're at least.
Row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Are we reduced row echelon form.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's.
Oh that was a general consensus of yes and unspoken
NOTE CONF
people.
Let's do this by volume.
NOTE CONF
Let's be fun.
I've never done this before.
NOTE CONF
If it's yes, say yes.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
If it's no, say no.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That worked quite well.
Good.
NOTE CONF
It is a very reduced echelon form.
So every row that has a one in it has
NOTE CONF
no other number.
So we are row reduced echelon form reduced row echelon
NOTE CONF
form I keep mixing those words up don't I?
I don't mean to.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
There are too many words.
NOTE CONF
Reduced row echelon form.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Where were we?
Number five.
NOTE CONF
Most people by some way are actually saying neither.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
It is neither.
Anyone got an idea about how I could put in
NOTE CONF
to row reduced echelon form?
Row echelon form?
NOTE CONF
Uh, any ideas to divide it?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Divide the last row.
What?
NOTE CONF
I divide the last row by two.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So row three is going to go to half of
row three.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Why don't I.
NOTE CONF
Why to be.
That's a good question.
NOTE CONF
Row three.
And then I'm going to have 12210112001.
NOTE CONF
What's the last number going to be.
Yell at me.
NOTE CONF
Oh good good.
And then we have every row starts with a one
NOTE CONF
and we have our nice steady staircase.
Good Okay.
NOTE CONF
Our last one.
What are we saying?
NOTE CONF
Most people are saying neither.
What?
NOTE CONF
Um.
What do we think?
NOTE CONF
How could I make it into reduced echelon form?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Swap the third and the fourth row.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So row three and row four could swap.
NOTE CONF
And then am I done?
What form are we then in.
NOTE CONF
Reduced.
Good.
NOTE CONF
0001800000.
There are too many numbers in a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So then all our leading ones with the beginning and
NOTE CONF
we have our nine.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
We have a nice staircase.
Okay, so that was quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
But we did find them all.
So that's good.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Why do we like this?
NOTE CONF
Why is this a form we want to go to?
Um, anyone got any ideas?
NOTE CONF
Why are we quite, like, row echelon form?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can solve for each other.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Were you going to say anything differently?
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So we have two results.
NOTE CONF
The two kind of big theorems in the reading.
One that says all matrices can be written into row
NOTE CONF
reduced row echelon form.
I will say right.
NOTE CONF
Eventually.
Um, so any matrix in the world can be written
NOTE CONF
as something that looks a bit like that, which is
quite a big result when you think about if you
NOTE CONF
just take a moment to think about it.
Any matrix in the world just using three rules can
NOTE CONF
be made to have ones leading them.
Zeros can be made mainly to look like zeros and
NOTE CONF
ones because that's what this form does.
It means potentially up to half your matrix is the
NOTE CONF
entries is zero, which is quite a big deal.
Um, you can cancel quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then we've got so that's them 2.2.
And then we have this other theorem that says if
NOTE CONF
you perform a sequence of operations, uh, the results our
equivalent system of linear equations.
NOTE CONF
So we spoke a bit about this yesterday.
Can anyone remind me what equivalent means.
NOTE CONF
That's the key word in that sentence.
I mean one in front of the other.
NOTE CONF
So I had identical.
And one one implies the other same set of solutions.
NOTE CONF
That's what I'm looking for.
So these two matrices here, they're not the same.
NOTE CONF
They are not equal to each other.
If you multiplied this matrix by something and the this
NOTE CONF
one by the same thing.
You'd get different answers if you added them.
NOTE CONF
You get different answers.
There's not they're not the same matrix.
NOTE CONF
Do not think they're the same matrix, but they have
the same as a set of linear equations.
NOTE CONF
As a system of linear equations.
They have the same set of solutions.
NOTE CONF
So the x and y values were the x values.
Here the satisfy this also satisfy this system, which makes
NOTE CONF
sense actually if you think about this this is saying
x equals one.
NOTE CONF
And this is saying x equals two.
And this is saying zero equals one and x equals
NOTE CONF
one x equals.
Yeah this is not a consistent system.
NOTE CONF
But yeah they've got the same set of solutions.
This is not consistent.
NOTE CONF
And this is also not consistent okay.
So those are the two kind of important things.
NOTE CONF
Um, which then allow us to, as we heard before,
write down solutions.
NOTE CONF
So let us start a new sheet of paper.
Well, go back to the Aldridge paper.
NOTE CONF
We got this matrix 122110112 and 001 and a half.
So that was from matrix number five.
NOTE CONF
Um, and again this was a question I heard yesterday.
Sometimes people write a line.
NOTE CONF
We're going to see what kind of why in a
minute.
NOTE CONF
I guess it's separating out the system from the answer
to solutions.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes I'll draw a line.
Sometimes I won't draw a line.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes the textbook will draw a line.
Sometimes a textbook won't draw a line.
NOTE CONF
It's one of those maths things that sometimes happens and
sometimes don't.
NOTE CONF
We don't care if you draw a line or not.
You can if you want.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes it's useful to have the distinction.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to do a method called back substitution.
Um, and essentially what we're going to do is we're
NOTE CONF
going to rewrite this method or this matrix.
It's an augmented matrix.
NOTE CONF
We're going to go back and write it as a
system of equations.
NOTE CONF
So what's the last equation in the system.
Z equals a half.
NOTE CONF
Good.
That's really nice I know what z is.
NOTE CONF
Um what's the second one.
Y plus z equals two.
NOTE CONF
Good.
But I also know z equals one half.
NOTE CONF
So that's going to give me the y equals two
minus one half.
NOTE CONF
So three halves.
Good.
NOTE CONF
What's the first equation.
Okay I got that mostly from the various mumbling.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So that's one minus two.
NOTE CONF
Lots of one half is going to be zero minus
three two.
NOTE CONF
Lots of three halves.
It's going to be minus three.
NOTE CONF
So very quickly I've got the solution out.
Hooray I've solved a system.
NOTE CONF
And that was very easy to solve compared to for
example um, this matrix.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone tell me what the solution to this matrix
is?
NOTE CONF
Anyone want to take a guess about the solution to
that matrix?
NOTE CONF
Is all that linear system.
It's exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Because yes.
NOTE CONF
So a little a little bit of extra things.
If you want to spend some fun time on a
NOTE CONF
Friday night doing some extra maths.
Can you show that I can row reduce that bottom
NOTE CONF
matrix?
If I follow Gaussian elimination and go all the way
NOTE CONF
through, I get that top matrix.
You should be able to do it.
NOTE CONF
You should be able to reduce that into that and
get the same answer out.
NOTE CONF
But hopefully we all agree it was a lot easier
to get the answer out of the top one.
NOTE CONF
We could almost just kind of read that off.
In fact, if we're in, um, reduced row echelon form,
NOTE CONF
we can just read the answer off.
So if I kind of further, more reduced this matrix.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone tell me what matrix I'd get if I
went all the way to reduced row echelon form?
NOTE CONF
I'll give you a clue.
The first three columns would look like that.
NOTE CONF
What would my last column be?
Anyone got any ideas?
NOTE CONF
Minus three.
Three halves.
NOTE CONF
And what were the last one be?
One half.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So you can literally just read the answer off.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Which makes life really easy.
So you don't necessarily have to go all the way
NOTE CONF
to reduced row echelon form.
You can get the answer fairly easily from row echelon
NOTE CONF
form.
But I mean, if you did it in the real
NOTE CONF
world, when you're applying this to something outside of this
course, you're probably dealing with bigger matrices.
NOTE CONF
This is really used in computing a lot.
You're probably coding this up.
NOTE CONF
If you're coding it up, you might.
It's not that many steps from there to there.
NOTE CONF
So you might as well get your computer to take
you all the way to there.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's useful to have both.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do we have any questions on that or comments or
NOTE CONF
thoughts or complaints.
No.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I promised you yesterday I would give you the
formal definition of rank.
NOTE CONF
More formal than the amount of meaningful equations.
It's actually the number of leading ones.
NOTE CONF
Of a matrix when it's in row echelon form.
Um, which makes sense if we think about what, um,
NOTE CONF
elementary row operations doing, it's filtering out unnecessary information systematically
is systematically removing information that's repeated about X and then
NOTE CONF
y and then z.
So each row operation takes out stuff that's repeated by
NOTE CONF
the other equations.
So actually we are in reducing our matrix.
NOTE CONF
We are reducing the number of unnecessary equations, unnecessary bits
of information, until we get a system that essentially is
NOTE CONF
just telling us what x is, what y's and what
z is.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it makes sense.
The number of leading ones should be the kind of
NOTE CONF
amount of useful information it's telling us.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what rank.
Let's do a quick.
NOTE CONF
We might just do this as a kind of quick
run through what ranks number one three.
NOTE CONF
Good.
What ranks number two.
NOTE CONF
Three.
So two of having three and two.
NOTE CONF
Somebody want to give me a bit of an explanation.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Number one when you know exactly when in row echelon
form.
NOTE CONF
So we're only in row echelon form here.
So this has rank two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What about number three.
NOTE CONF
We've done number three haven't we know we've not.
What's round number.
NOTE CONF
Matrix number three.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Matrix number four.
Oh that's almost designed.
NOTE CONF
Uh matrix number five.
Matrix number six.
NOTE CONF
Good.
We all seem happy with that.
NOTE CONF
That's fun.
Okay, so that's nice if we've got all our answers
NOTE CONF
out.
But this is happens.
NOTE CONF
We've got one.
We've got a point.
NOTE CONF
We've got one unique answer.
The unique answer is minus three.
NOTE CONF
Three halves half.
That's a point.
NOTE CONF
What happens if I have infinitely many answers?
Anyone got any any thoughts about that?
NOTE CONF
Fair enough.
Let's have a look at it.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's take this matrix 120001000.
And I'm going to draw a line this time 640.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, what's the rank of this matrix?
NOTE CONF
Two.
Yeah, I've got two leading ones.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And we can, if we think about converting this back
NOTE CONF
into, um, a system of equation form, I've kind of
got x, y, and z.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a three dimensional system.
And I'm kind of saying, well, there's a leading one
NOTE CONF
kind of with x so I can determine what x
is, and there's a leading one with Z.
NOTE CONF
So I can determine what z is.
But why does not have a leading one in its
NOTE CONF
column.
So I'm going to have a bit of a problem.
NOTE CONF
I can't really determine what Y is.
There's no leading one.
NOTE CONF
I've not got a piece of meaningful information about why.
So this is going to be our free variable.
NOTE CONF
So I can say well that's y equal s I
know that's going to be my free variable.
NOTE CONF
Then this bottom equation is just going to tell me
well z equals four.
NOTE CONF
So I know z is fixed.
And then what's x going to be.
NOTE CONF
What's this top equation.
Yeah six minus two s.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense to everybody.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So I've kind of got.
Um I've managed to the leading ones tell me which
NOTE CONF
or the lack of a leading one tells me where
my free variables are.
NOTE CONF
And even though I've not got a point as a
solution now, I've still got a set of solutions.
NOTE CONF
So just like yesterday, I could say all my sets
of solutions are s six minus two, s, s and
NOTE CONF
four.
And what actually might be more useful is to write
NOTE CONF
this down as to kind of split the s off.
So I could say this is 604 plus s lots
NOTE CONF
of minus two one zero.
Does everyone see what I've done there.
NOTE CONF
Bit of a step.
So I've got this.
NOTE CONF
I think it's hardest to see in this first point.
I've not got an S here.
NOTE CONF
So it's going into this kind of vector without an
S.
NOTE CONF
But here I've got a factor of S that I
can kind of take out.
NOTE CONF
And I can say it's minus two and one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is kind of on what we were
talking about yesterday here.
NOTE CONF
I now have a point on my line, and now
I have a direction I can walk across.
NOTE CONF
And S is telling me how far I can walk.
So six zero minus four is a point here.
NOTE CONF
Two minus two one zero is a direction there and
S is telling me how many steps I should go
NOTE CONF
in this direction.
And I'm walking along a line.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense to people?
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
So this is the basic solution.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
I can split it up.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a bit of a think about this
in higher dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Let's return to GeoGebra.
Um, I have a point.
NOTE CONF
So a point A I've just randomly picked it's 604.
And then I'm going to define the point B I'm
NOTE CONF
going to write a line.
It's the point A plus some steps in the direction
NOTE CONF
of minus two one zero.
Oh look it's the thing we just had.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if I change what f is if I
change how many steps I'm walking.
NOTE CONF
Oh, look, I'm forming a line that goes through the
point A, which is what we'd expect.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I could do another direction.
Instead of going off in that direction.
NOTE CONF
I could go off in that direction.
So I could instead, instead of looking at minus two
NOTE CONF
one zero, I could look at minus three for two.
And there's another parameter telling me how many steps I
NOTE CONF
can walk in that direction, and where am I going
to end up there?
NOTE CONF
Oh going fast.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
There's a line in that direction.
So can anyone guess if I have the system with
NOTE CONF
both of these?
What's going to happen?
NOTE CONF
Books.
My space of solutions.
NOTE CONF
Going to be a plane?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Two dimensional plane.
In fact, if I twist it there, that's quite clear.
NOTE CONF
You can see the plane.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's imagine I want a point that can go
in in the plane.
NOTE CONF
So far I've only got two lines.
How do I get to a general point in this
NOTE CONF
plane.
Any ideas.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Linear combination.
NOTE CONF
Pardon.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to take a linear combination of the
two.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to go some steps in s in
the s direction and some steps in the R direction.
NOTE CONF
So where is my point D.
It should be in my plane.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
It's up there all the way up there.
NOTE CONF
That's not very good for you.
If my plane.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Say, if I wanted my D to be more.
NOTE CONF
Let's try and.
Move this over a.
NOTE CONF
Bit.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I could move.
NOTE CONF
So my point D is some point generally in this
plane.
NOTE CONF
And I can kind of go out to places between
these two coordinates.
NOTE CONF
So in later courses we'll kind of see.
What we've done here is to find two new axes.
NOTE CONF
You're used to getting to the point.
If I give you two axes and I say go
NOTE CONF
to one one, you used to go in one direction
here and one direction here, and you're kind of here.
NOTE CONF
But what if your your axes are actually more like
this?
NOTE CONF
That's what we're doing now.
They're not necessarily right angles, but we've still got two
NOTE CONF
axes and a linear combination of I go so many
ways in this direction and then so many ways in
NOTE CONF
this direction, I can cover every point in my plane.
It's just I'm no longer walking like that.
NOTE CONF
I'm walking perhaps a bit more naturally like that.
And then maybe I take a little step forward.
NOTE CONF
Does that make some sense?
We're going to see a lot more of this kind
NOTE CONF
of idea.
So it will come back in later bits of the
NOTE CONF
course.
Okay, let's return to a vote.
NOTE CONF
You've listened to me speak for a long time.
So that's not what I want.
NOTE CONF
Let's return to this matrix.
That's what I want.
NOTE CONF
Matrix number four.
How many free variables would I need to express the
NOTE CONF
space of solutions?
Um, I'm going to give you.
NOTE CONF
That's not what I want.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No.
know which one of the three variables.
NOTE CONF
That's my question.
So we've now got, um, you can't see.
NOTE CONF
That's a good point.
So we've got this matrix here.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to put a line here and take off
the answer.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to say we have one, two
three, four, five, six variables.
NOTE CONF
I'm not labelling them xyz ABC because that's long.
I'm labelling them X1X2X2X4X5XX.
NOTE CONF
So I've got six variables I'm working in six variable
six dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Um which one of these are the free variables.
And I'm going to give you just a couple of
NOTE CONF
minutes to vote.
I think lots of people already voting.
NOTE CONF
Doo doo doo doo.
Feel free to have a bit of a chat.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Ten 987654321.
NOTE CONF
We seem to have very clear consensus, which is good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
The vast majority of you are right.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a quick look at the comments.
Um, but.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Where are the leading ones?
NOTE CONF
There are no leading ones.
There were no leading ones.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, yeah, there are no leading ones.
Let's just have a quick look.
NOTE CONF
Where?
My shoes.
NOTE CONF
They're here.
Under here.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Where are my shoes?
NOTE CONF
There is no leading one.
There is a leading one in column six.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at column six, there's a leading
one at the bottom.
NOTE CONF
Um, cool.
Okay, so if.
NOTE CONF
We.
If we keep going with that matrix, I'm going to
NOTE CONF
try and see if you can.
There you go.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have that matrix there which you hopefully can
NOTE CONF
still see You can't see it because I've not changed
the screen.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Um, so you've got this, uh, matrix there.
NOTE CONF
We know x3 and x5 are the other three variables,
so let's call them S and let's call them r.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then let's think about the solution.
So the general solution x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6
NOTE CONF
is going to look like what is x6 going to
be one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah good x5 is going to be are x4.
What's x4 going to be.
NOTE CONF
Two minus five are good.
So I need I know that one lot of x4
NOTE CONF
plus five lots of x5 equals two.
But we know x5 equals r.
NOTE CONF
So it's two minus five.
Lots of x5.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What about x3?
NOTE CONF
We know is S what's x two?
Three plus four s.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is the harder one.
You might all have to murmur collectively as a group.
NOTE CONF
So can we say somewhat clearly what X1 is.
I did actually hear generally that.
NOTE CONF
So that was quite good.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
So there is our space of solutions slightly misplaced across
NOTE CONF
the page actually.
Um, and we can do what we did before.
NOTE CONF
So what is a point on my plane of solutions.
For three zero.
NOTE CONF
Good.
What's next?
NOTE CONF
Perfect.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to add s lots of what.
My life.
NOTE CONF
Is.
Good.
NOTE CONF
And I'm adding all lots of what?
They.
NOTE CONF
Look at you.
You just found the the the equation of a two
NOTE CONF
dimensional plane in a six dimensional space.
None of you probably have done that before.
NOTE CONF
That's really cool.
That's six dimensions.
NOTE CONF
That's big.
Um, in general terms, um, that's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
That went a lot better than I was expecting.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a round of applause.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
That's gone way better than it ever has before.
NOTE CONF
I'm genuinely impressed.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that is the basic solution that we have.
Um, over two dimensional plane in six dimensional space.
NOTE CONF
So we have a .430201.
And I've got -12 1000 in that direction, maybe minus
NOTE CONF
six zero zero minus five one zero in that direction
that I can walk off in.
NOTE CONF
We can't imagine this.
This is I can't bring up GeoGebra and check this.
NOTE CONF
We can't physically get our heads around it.
So that is cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we have five minutes left and I want to
just do a really quick thing.
NOTE CONF
So this is mainly just to check we know what
some keywords are.
NOTE CONF
If I give you that matrix the system is going
to be homogeneous.
NOTE CONF
If what do I need to happen.
Oh I'm really bad at this today.
NOTE CONF
What do I need to happen for that system that's
going to appear on the board?
NOTE CONF
There we go.
What needs to happen if that's going to be homogeneous
NOTE CONF
P equals zero.
Wonderful.
NOTE CONF
Um, what if I wanted to be consistent?
I might give you a minute just to chat to
NOTE CONF
your friend.
I'm going to give you 30s to chat to your
NOTE CONF
friend.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
We're running out of time.
So what are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
What do we need to be for that to be
consistent?
NOTE CONF
Anyone got any ideas?
I'm hearing a lot of people saying A equals B.
NOTE CONF
That would actually work if I did equal B.
That's one of the cases.
NOTE CONF
It could be consistent.
Anybody got any other ideas?
NOTE CONF
A should be zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What?
Someone had their hand up in the middle there.
NOTE CONF
A equals zero.
But it's consistent with anything but zero.
NOTE CONF
A has to be, not zero.
Okay, so we've got some different answers.
NOTE CONF
That was a fairly comprehensive one at the end.
Let's think about what that bottom equation is saying.
NOTE CONF
It's saying a lots of x4 equals b.
You can't see a lots of x4 is equal to
NOTE CONF
b.
That's what that last bit saying.
NOTE CONF
So if A equals 0BA better equals zero.
Or else you've got zero equals two again which we
NOTE CONF
don't like.
So yes I'm liking this idea at the back.
NOTE CONF
Either b equals zero.
In which case we just take x4 to be zero.
NOTE CONF
Or if b isn't zero then we kind of need
a tb0.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise we're going to have some.
Hang on.
NOTE CONF
What did I just say?
If B is not equal to zero, we don't want
NOTE CONF
A to be zero, because otherwise we're going to have
zero on the left hand side and something not zero
NOTE CONF
on the right hand side, which is not nice.
So we've kind of got two options.
NOTE CONF
Either b equals zero or b doesn't equal zero and
A doesn't equal zero okay.
NOTE CONF
Everybody happy.
They're good.
NOTE CONF
We are out of time.
Um so thank you all for coming.
NOTE CONF
The reading quiz will be released on Monday.
It's got some videos of me doing some examples of
NOTE CONF
stuff, and then it's got some questions on the reading.
The assessed and practice quizzes also released on Wednesday Monday.
NOTE CONF
Please do them before Thursday midday.
I will see you all on Tuesday.
NOTE CONF